# Child of Java EE and the cloud

What is Helidon? Turning to ethimology, Helidon comes from Greece and it means the _swallow_ bird in English. According to the Cambridge Dictionary (ref), swallow is a small bird with pointed wings and a tail with two points that flies quickly and catches insects to eat as it flies.

[image here]

Wait, is that bird what I think it is? You’ve most likely seen this kind of bird at least once, and of course, it is dallëndyshe in Albanian.

All in all, Oracle has given its tech framework quite a name.

Let’s head to the motivation behind this framework and the purpose it holds, as it takes flight.

Now as it is common with birds, there are many families. And Helidon comes in two shapes, Helidon SE and Helidon MP. 

Helidon SE embraces the latest Java SE features: reactive streams, asynchronous and functional programming, and fluent-style APIs.

Helidon MP provides an implementation to the MicroProfile specification. This is the child of Java EE and the cloud. 

With this post, I am going to give a try to the Helidon MP. I am going to start with the Helidon v2, which required Maven 3.6.1+ and JDK 11 or newer.

```bash
mvn archetype:generate -DinteractiveMode=false \
    -DarchetypeGroupId=io.helidon.archetypes \
    -DarchetypeArtifactId=helidon-quickstart-mp \
    -DarchetypeVersion=2.0.0-RC1 \
    -DgroupId=com.albi \
    -DartifactId=helidon-mp \
    -Dpackage=com.albi.helidon.mp
```

There you go. Navigate to the project. The directory has this structure:

```bash
.
├── Dockerfile
├── Dockerfile.jlink
├── Dockerfile.native
├── README.md
├── app.yaml
├── pom.xml
└── src
    ├── main
    │   ├── java
    │   │   └── com
    │   │       └── albi
    │   │           └── helidon
    │   │               └── mp
    │   │                   ├── GreetResource.java
    │   │                   ├── GreetingProvider.java
    │   │                   ├── ReactiveService.java
    │   │                   └── package-info.java
    │   └── resources
    │       ├── META-INF
    │       │   ├── beans.xml
    │       │   └── microprofile-config.properties
    │       └── logging.properties
    └── test
        ├── java
        │   └── com
        │       └── albi
        │           └── helidon
        │               └── mp
        │                   └── MainTest.java
        └── resources
            └── META-INF
                └── microprofile-config.properties
```

That’s neat.

Build the application.

```
mvn package
```

Let's run (fly would also be appropriate)!

```
java -jar target/helidon-mp.jar
```

Well, that was fast. Like lighting fast.

Let's see what we got here.

Either via curl or Postman (or Insomnia):

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/greet
```

The response is on point:

```
{
  "message": "Hello World!"
}
```

Try another one

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/greet/Helidon
```

Response

```
{
  "message": "Hello Helidon!"
}
```

GET requests are easy. We all know what's tricky. PUT requests. Make the computer listen from your input.

```
curl -X PUT -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"greeting" : "Aloha"}' http://localhost:8080/greet/greeting
```

This request has no response. It could return the updated greeting.

Now we've changed the greeting. Let's greet someone cool, like Stitch (reference).

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/greet/Stitch
```

Response

```
{
  "message": "Aloha Stitch!"
}
```

The way it works just of the box is impressive. No hand written dependencies, no setup, and no application server!

Let's see what we got in more detail.

## Configuration

Taking a look for a minute at the `resources` folder reveals some configuration properties.

```bash
── resources
   ├── META-INF
   │   ├── beans.xml
   │   └── microprofile-config.properties
   └── logging.properties
```

The `beans.xml` belongs to the CDI specification and is used to enable CDI servies. By default, annotated beans are considered for dependency injection.

The `microprofile-config.properties` can hold application properties and microprofile server properties, e.g. port.

And the logging configuration can be tuned in `logging.properties`.

## db/jpa

## openapi

## security meh

## runtime libs

## Maybe add dockah?

## jlink?

## Tell GraalVM Story.



## Conclusion

…

On a personal note, it feels refreshing to get to write after such a long time. Since the last time I did Earth has seen a global disease outbreak, the quarantine, UFOs were confirmed by the US goverment, and the protests in USA. Be kind, and this too shall pass.
